Add tutorial: Segmentation of Anatomical Structures in Medical 3-D Images (#6601)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/imaging/tutorials/dicom-anatomical-3d/tutorial.md

>    - *"Concatenation axis"*: `Z-axis (concatenate images as slices of a 3-D image or image sequence)`
>    - *"Scaling of values"*: `Preserve range of values`
>    - *"Sort images before concatenating"*: `Sort images by their position along the Z-axis`
{: .hands_on}

Some of the tools that we will be using in our analysis require that the voxel size of the image is isotropic. To ensure that this is the case, we will re-sample the image data to an isotropic voxel size:

> <hands-on-title>Re-sample image data for isotropic pixel/voxel sizes</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [Scale image](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/imgteam/scale_image/ip_scale_image/0.25.2+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters to re-sample the image data to an isotropic voxel size:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input image"*: Output of {% tool [Concatenate images or channels](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/imgteam/concat_channels/ip_concat_channels/0.5) %}
>    - *"How to scale?"*: `Scale to spatially isotropic pixels/voxels`
>    - *"Method"*: `Down-sample (might lose information)`
{: .hands_on}

If the image data already would have been isotropic, this tool would yield the original data.

> CT image data, such as the dataset that we are using in this tutorial, typically have intensity values that correspond to the Hounsfield scale. Using Hounsfield Units (HU) is advantageous, because it allows to directly identify specific materials or tissues solely based on the image intensities. Typical HU values are –1000 HU for air, –700 to –200 HU for skin tissue, –200 to –50 HU for fat tissue, 0 HU for water, –20 to 140 HU for muscle tissue, and 200 to 3071 HU for bone tissue (e.g., {% cite chougule2018clinical %}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CT image data, such as the dataset that we are using in this tutorial, typically have intensity values that correspond to the Hounsfield scale. Using Hounsfield Units (HU) is advantageous, because it allows to directly identify specific materials or tissues solely based on the image intensities. Typical Hounsfield unit (HU) values are −1000 HU for air, approximately −950 to −650 HU for normally aerated lung tissue, −190 to −30 HU for subcutaneous fat, 0 HU for water, +30 to +60 HU for muscle tissue, and >+400 HU (often >+1000 HU for cortical bone) for bone tissue (e.g., {% cite chougule2018clinical %}).
```

# Skeletal Segmentation

The imaged section of the torso in our dataset contains parts of prominent skeletal structures such as the pelvis, the spine, and the thorax. Segmentation of these structures is easy due to the distinct ranges of the Hounsfield scale:

> <hands-on-title>Skeletal segmentation in a CT image</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [Threshold image](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/imgteam/2d_auto_threshold/ip_threshold/0.25.2+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input image"*: Output of {% tool [Clip image intensities](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/imgteam/clip_image/clip_image/0.7.3+galaxy0) %}
>    - *"Thresholding method"*: `Manual`
>    - *"Threshold value"*: `120`
>
>    > <question-title></question-title>
>    >
>    > Why do we use a threshold value of just 120, if the typical range of HU values for bone tissue starts at about 200 HU?
>    >
>    > > <solution-title></solution-title>

> >    > > Some bones in the imaged data rare quite thin (e.g., the ends of the ribs). When we re-sampled the image data to an isotropic voxel size, we chose to *down-sample* the image data. A consequence of this is that voxel intensity values are locally averaged, which can lead to reduced intensity values of thin structures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    > > Some bones in the imaged data are quite thin (e.g., the ends of the ribs). This leads to partial volume effects: voxels at the edges of thin structures contain a mixture of bone and surrounding soft tissue (e.g., cartilage), resulting in intermediate intensity values lower than pure bone. When we re-sampled the image data to an isotropic voxel size, we chose to *down-sample* the image data. A consequence of this is that voxel intensity values are locally averaged, which can lead to reduced intensity values of thin structures.
```

> {: .solution }
{: .question}

# Vessel Segmentation

As another example of the segmentation of anatomical structures, we will now perform a segmentation of the aortic bifurcation, a key vascular landmark where the abdominal aorta divides into the left and right common iliac arteries. Vessel segmentation is very different from skeletal segmentation, because vessels do not exhibit a specific HU intensity value and generally have a very low contrast compared to the surrounding tissue. Moreover, they often are very thin, elongated structures, with and without branches, which poses additional challenges compared to segmentation of large connected image regions.

In CT imaging, vessels usually appear as thin lines of subtly higher intensity than the surrounding tissue (just like the ridges of mountains on a relief map). Image filters that enhance such structures are thus called *ridge filters*. The most prominent ridge filter for vessel enhancement in 3-D images is the Frangi filter ({% cite Frangi1998 %}).

> 

Author: Thanks, do you maybe have a publication I could include as a source for the numbers?
